>> Richard Feldman: All right,
if this is our message type and
we've seen that that's
the type of message and
then we've seen that model
also we've given a type alias.
What's the type of update?
This is the type of update, update takes
a message and a model and returns a model.
Now if you're like me,
the first time you saw a type annotation
like this you thought, that looks weird.
That doesn't look like
that's what it's saying,
it looks like it's saying
it takes a message and
then returns a model and then returns
another model, what's going on there?
Why are there two arrows there,
shouldn't there be something
like message comma model?
So I thought this was very weird until
someone explained to me why it is that way
and then afterwards I was like,
that's really cool.
Not only do I understand this now, but
I actually think this is how it should
be and any other way would be weird and
a misrepresentation of
what's actually accurate.
So I'm gonna explain what
was explained to me and
we'll see if you have the same reaction.
Okay, so Elm repl is a nice tool for
messing around with things and
sort of playing around with stuff.
It's a read eval print loop.
And if you've never used a repl before,
the basic idea is you put in an expression
such as, let's say, I wanna call our
pluralized function, passing leaf, leaves,
and 3, and it just prints out the result.
So in this case, 3 leaves.
Also in Elm repl there's a nice little
feature where it will tell you the type
that it returned.
So because Elm does type inference,
it's like, hey I know the answer to that.
So I'm just gonna let you know
not only what the value is but
also what that value type
is right there in the repl.
So if I called pluralize leaf,
leaves, and 3,
comes back with three
leaves as the answer.
I can also just put a plain function
in there and Elm repl will just say,
well here's the tag for that function.
So in this case it takes a string and
another string and then an int and
returns a string.
And there's that syntax at
the end with all the arrows.
Okay, now here's an interesting question,
what happens if I put in
pluralize leaf and leaves?
Well, if you remember from
earlier on the workshop,
we discussed spatial application.
So when you call an Elm function and
you leave off an argument,
Elm says,
you're not done calling this function yet.
So I'm not gonna execute it,
I'm not gonna pass undefined or
anything like that cuz
we don't have undefined.
What I'm gonna do is I'm gonna say,
okay, you gave me this function,
you gave me two out of
the three arguments.
What I'm gonna give you back is a function
that takes the last argument and then,
finally, finishes the job and returns the
thing that the overall function returns.
So that's partial application, okay,
so the first thing makes sense to us.
Obviously, if you pass all the arguments,
it gives us back a string.
Also the last thing, I think,
more intuitive than the middle thing in
the sense that if I call it passing
two out of three arguments.
So it's gonna give me back a function that
clearly takes an int which is the final
argument and then returns the string
that is the result of finishing the job.
How do we square those
with that middle thing,
where the multiple arguments
have the multiple arrows.
Okay, lets think about what we know or
what we've observed in a little
bit of a different way.
So we're calling pluralize passing leaf,
leaves, and 3, and
that gives us back a string.
And we've also established that if you
call pluralize passing just leaf and
leaves, and leaving off the 3.
That gives us back a function that
takes an int and returns a string,
because of partial application.
Now, another way we could write this out,
is we could put parentheses around this,
that's fine, right?
I mean, parentheses are essentially
harmless in this case,
we're just saying wanna put
parentheses around that expression.
That's legit.
Another way we could do this is we could
put the parentheses down there and
also add a three on the end.
So this is essentially we've
taken the previous one and
said, well whats in those parentheses
is a function from into string.
So let's take that function and
give it an int.
Well, sure enough that
will give us a string.
And actually if we look at this,
we can see the bottom one and
the top one are basically the same.
I mean, all we've done is we've
just added some parenthesis.
So the first and third example here
are really the exact same thing.
It's just in both cases we are taking
pluralize leaf and leaves and
then giving it a three.
We get the same answer either way,
with or without the parenthesis.
Okay, so let's just get rid one of them so
we can just kinda see things in this way.
All right, what happens if we get
it only one of the three arguments.
Well, the way the partial
application works is that,
anytime you partially apply a function,
however remaining arguments you leave off,
that's how many arguments
the resulting function is gonna take.
So if we call pluralize just passing leaf,
it's gonna give us back a function
which takes a string, and
then returns a function that takes
an int and returns a string.
So we can see that in action by adding
some more parentheses down here,
and say okay, what happens if
I call that thing in this way?
Well, if I take this,
it's a function that takes the string and
returns a function that returns, takes an
int and returns the string, is that true?
Well yeah, we can see that from
the example down below now that I've added
additional parenthesis.
If I take this exact function, and I give
it a string like it asked for, well,
sure enough, what I get back is a function
that takes an int and returns a string.
And if I take that, and all those
parentheses, and I give it an int,
well then sure enough I get a string.
So we can start to see
a pattern develop here.
Each time, we partially apply it one more.
If we give it one more argument,
it gives us back sort of the next
thing in the triangle here.
Take that one step further and
not even partially apply it all.
Let's just give it zero arguments.
Well, to continue the pattern,
now we're like okay, well,
give me that very first string and
I will give you back the next
thing which is to say, a function that
takes an int and returns a string.
So now we sort of like
built it all the way up and
as we can see in each of these cases
when we give it one more argument.
All we're doing is partially
applying it one more time and
getting one more specific function until
eventually we run out of functions, and
we're left with just a string.
And what if I told you that if when
I just have pluralize by itself,
you just don't need those parenthesis and
the type annotation.
So the reason that we annotate it like
this is essentially that either of these
is perfectly valid.
And in fact, if you want to annotate your
types like this Elm will allow it because
it's accurate.
It's just that this looks nicer, so people
tend to do it without the parentheses and
they mean the same thing.
So that's why this is sort of
the canonical way of writing this, but
it's actually also really the only
accurate way to write it.
Because this actually is what is going on.
It really is true that pluralize
a function that takes the string and
returns a function that takes
the integer and return a string.
It's just that the way that Elm calls it,
it's sort of masking that by making it
look as if it's actually a function
that requires three arguments and
takes three arguments.
But when we start to look at what
happens when you partially apply it,
we can kind of see the truth,
which is that really, essentially,
every Elm function really
only takes one argument.
It's just that quite a lot of Elm function
happen to take argument, then return
another function which possible takes one
argument and returns another function.
But the syntax makes it nice, so that
you have the ergonomics of calling with
multiple arguments while still having this
nice guarantee under the hood that partial
application just works
consistently across the board.
In summary,
that's why updates type as this,
[LAUGH] message, a model, and a model.
Okay, to sum up,
we talked about type annotations, so
we talked about record annotations,
primitive annotations.
We can see int, Bool and
point which is a record that has both.
We talked about type parameters,
parameterized types,
we talked about List String
which is to say list of strings.
And we talked about HTML message, which is
say some HTML that emits a message of that
particular type when the user interacts
and sends that type of message to update.
We talked about how it's really
important that those agree.
And if HTML's parameter is on a different
type than what update expects,
then it won't compile,
because those need to be consistent.
We talked about type aliases which is
a way to give a name to a particular type.
So that we can break our types down into
different named things rather than having
to glob them all together
when we have complex records.
And finally, we talked about how to
annotate function, which is to say,
annotate them based on
partial application.
If they have multiple arguments,
then we're going to represent that
honestly by showing an arrow at each case.
Because essentially every Elm function
really only has one argument,
it's just that sometimes it
returns an additional function.